## REPEATER
## Genome-wide tool for rapid *de novo* identification, profiling, and visualisation of interspersed and tandem repeats.

## Author
Ruslan Kalendar 
email: ruslan.kalendar@helsinki.fi

## TotalRepeats online tool: 
https://primerdigital.com/tools/repeats.html

## Citation Reference
Kalendar R, Kairov U 2024. Genome-wide tool for sensitive *de novo* identification and visualisation of interspersed and tandem repeats. Bioinformatics and biology insights, 18: 1-11. DOI: 10.1177/11779322241306391
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/11779322241306391

## Availability and requirements:

Operating system(s): Platform independent

Programming language: Java 24 or higher

Java Downloads: https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/

How do I set or change the Java path system variable: https://www.java.com/en/download/help/path.html

To run the project from the command line. Command-line options, separated by spaces. 
The executive file ```Repeater2.jar``` is in the ```dist``` directory, which can be copied to any location. 
Go to the target folder and type the following; an individual file or a file folder can be specified:

```java -jar Repeater2.jar <target_file_path/Folder_path>```


### Basic usage:

```java -jar <Repeater2Path>\dist\Repeater2.jar <target_file_path> optional_commands```


### Examples:
```
java -jar <Repeater2Path>\dist\Repeater2.jar \test\4.txt -nomask -nogff

java -jar <Repeater2Path>\dist\Repeater2.jar \test\ kmer=18 sln=90 image=5000x300 -nomask -seqshow

java -jar <Repeater2Path>\dist\Repeater2.jar \test\2.txt -ssronly -seqshow flanks=100

java -jar C:\Repeater2\dist\Repeater2.jar D:\Genomes\Hydra_vulgaris\ kmer=20 sln=100 image=10000x300

```

### Large genome usage (you will have to show the program to use more RAM, for example as listed here, up to 64 Gb memory: -Xms16g -Xmx64g):
```
java -jar -Xms16g -Xmx64g <\dist\Repeater2.jar> <input_Folder_path> kmer=20 sln=100

java -jar -Xms16g -Xmx64g C:\Repeater2\dist\Repeater2.jar E:\Genomes\Hordeum_marinum\
```

Analysing all files in the folder:

```
java -jar \Repeater2\dist\Repeater2.jar \Repeater2\test\ 

java -jar -Xms16g -Xmx32g C:\Repeater2\dist\Repeater2.jar E:\Genomes\GRCh38.p14\
```


**Common options:**

```
kmer=19	 minimal kmer=12 (default kmer=19)

min=30	 initial repeat length (default min=30)

sln=90	 string length (default sln=90)

flanks=100	extend the flanks of the repeat with an appropriate length (100 nt) (default flanks=0)

image=10000x300	(by default, the dimensionality of the image is automatically determined)

-nomask	quick generation a new file with masking repeats (masking by default)

-nogff	generate a GFF file (GFF generated by default)

-seqshow	extract repeat sequences (by default this function is not performed)

-ssronly	analysing only the SSR/telomers loci (by default this function is not performed)

```

## Sequence Entry:

Sequence data files are prepared using a text editor and saved in ASCII as text/plain format (.txt) or in .fasta or without file extensions (a file extension is not obligatory). The program takes a single sequence or accepts multiple DNA sequences in FASTA format. The template length is not limited.

## FASTA format description:
A sequence in FASTA format consists of the following:
One line starts with a ">" sign and a sequence identification code. A textual description of the sequence optionally follows it. Since it is not part of the official format description, software can ignore it when it is present.
One or more lines containing the sequence itself. A file in FASTA format may comprise more than one sequence.


## The output is saved in a GFF3 file: a nine-column, tab-delimited, plain text file. 
 
GFF format General Feature Format describes genes and other features associated with DNA, RNA, and Protein sequences. GFF lines have nine tab-separated fields:
Generic Feature Format Version 3 (GFF3) 
https://github.com/The-Sequence-Ontology/Specifications/blob/master/gff3.md
1. seqid - a cluster.
2. source - The program that generated this feature.
3. type - "repeat".
4. start - The starting position of the feature in the sequence. The first base is numbered 1.
5. stop - The ending position of the feature (inclusive).
6. score - length 
7. strand - Valid entries include '+', '-', or '.' (for those who don't know/care).
8. phase - If the feature is a coding exon, the frame should be a number between 0 and 2, representing the first base's reading frame. If the feature is not a coding exon, the value should be '.'
9. Sequence (if a parameter used: seqshow=true).
